README.md, before:

# filler-sound-detector

This project aims at detecting annoying filler sounds in an audio with help of machine learning.

---

# Set up
Depedencies are managed with `poetry`. Install poetry using [instructions](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation) and then install dependencies by executing this in the project folder:

```bash
$ poetry install
```

---

# Data
I labeled the data myself while editing my friend/client's podcast as a side hustle. There are a total of 67 audio tracks (22.3 GB) and text files with labels. The labels show start and end timestamps of the audio with filler sounds.
- Language: Spanish
- Format: Waveform audio
- Sampling rate: 48k, 16 bit

---

# Processing

## Strategy

While preprocessing, we split the data into equally long frames. Each frame is mapped to not-filler/filler. Possibly, a hopping window can be used.

![](img/stragegy-1.png)

To decide what frame is a filler, we look at the proportion of its duration that is occupied by filler and if it's above an arbitrary threshold (I picked 80% to begin with), it will be labeled as such.

Window and hopping length can be adjusted after evaluation to find the optimal tradeoff between processing speed and performance.

## Features

The audio frames are transformed into [Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mel-frequency_cepstrum). It tells us what frequencies were most activated during the speech, creating a kind of compressed spectrogram. It represents the audio clip in a way that is similar to how we humans perceive sound, which makes MFCC a very popular feature in speech recognition systems.

![](img/mfcc.png)

## Labels

To choose an appropriate window and hop length for our data preprocessing, we have to consider the target distribution.

The filler sound length seems to follow a log-normal distribution. 

![](img/target_distribution.jpg)

Turns out in 95% of fillers last longer than 0.279 sec. A good fit for window length, therefore, would be anything below `sample_rate * 0.279`. Given that we down-sample the audio from 48k samples/sec to 8k, we get `2232` samples per window. We'll round that number to `2048`.

---

# Evaluation

To evaluate the models, I followed a few principles:
- Use different speakers in training & evaluation. This will ensure the model learns to detect filler sounds well for new speakers.
- Use the same threshold to decide what proportion of filler sound in a frame makes it labeled as `filler` (80%).   
- Use a suitable evaluation metric for imbalanced datasets. [Average precision score](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.average_precision_score.html) (area under the Precision-Recall Curve) seemed to be the best choice. It 1) is independent of the cutoff threshold and 2) focuses on the minority class and therefore is suitable for imbalanced datasets.

---

# Modeling

I tried out training two models: LightGBM & a multi-layer perceptron. LightGBM worked better out of the box.

```markdown
| Model                  | Avg. precision score | F1    |
|------------------------|----------------------|-------|
| LightGBM               | 0.103                | 0.114 |
| Multi-layer perceptron | 0.075                | 0.109 |
```

## LightGBM

Before jumping into deep learning, I trained a LightGBM model with reasonable default parameters to establish some baseline.  

```
| Avg. precision score | F1    |
|----------------------|-------|
| 0.103                | 0.114 |
```

![](img/results-lgbm.png)

## Multi-layer perceptron

Then I picked multi-layer perceptron as the first neural model to train. Unfortunately, the model did not beat the LGBM but came close in F1 score. The model probably requires more hyperparameter tuning.   

```
| Avg. precision score | F1    |
|----------------------|-------|
| 0.075                | 0.109 |
```

![](img/results-mlp.png)

## Improvement ideas

1. **Tune the hyperparameters:**
   1. Change the number of hidden layers
   2. Adjust the learning rate
   3. Add regularization
2. **Tune training configuration:** I can use other parameters in `constants.py` such as the window length & hop length of frames as well as labeling threshold.
3. **Treat input data as time series:** So far, each audio frame was treated as individual independent training example. However, it is hard to tell if a small piece of audio is a filler sound without context. Speech is actually a time series where order matters. I suspect that passing a sequence of audio frames instead of just one per training example would improve the results. RNN models such as LSTM can be used.
4. **Sushi method:** Pass raw data with no preprocessing to the neural network.

# Conclusion

Until now, using the model isn't practically useful. Multi-layer perceptron will cut a lot of good sound, whereas LightGBM will leave a lot of filler sounds untouched.

---

Commit message:

refactor: fine-tune multi-layer perceptron model (#11)
Tweaking hyperparameters of the first neural model to squeeze the biggest performance out of it before jumping into more complex model architectures.

What I am doing here:

Increasing the number of hidden nodes of linear layers from 128 to 512 and more.
Adding regularization to prevent overfitting, as we increase the model complexity
a. Weight decay
b. Adding dropout layers
Adding learning rate decay to decrease the rate gradually with every completed epoch
All parameter tuning as well as future work will now happen on top of the BaseEstimator class. It is modularized and can be inherited to create MLP and other models in the future.

Results:
The fine-tuned model beats the LightGBM model in both AP and F1 scores!

Model	                         Avg. precision score	F1
LightGBM	                 0.103	                         0.114
Multi-layer perceptron	0.121	                         0.205

README.md, after:

# filler-sound-detector

This project aims at detecting annoying filler sounds in an audio with help of machine learning.

---

# Set up
Depedencies are managed with `poetry`. Install poetry using [instructions](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation) and then install dependencies by executing this in the project folder:

```bash
$ poetry install
```

---

# Data
I labeled the data myself while editing my friend/client's podcast as a side hustle. There are a total of 67 audio tracks (22.3 GB) and text files with labels. The labels show start and end timestamps of the audio with filler sounds.
- Language: Spanish
- Format: Waveform audio
- Sampling rate: 48k, 16 bit

---

# Processing

## Strategy

While preprocessing, we split the data into equally long frames. Each frame is mapped to not-filler/filler. Possibly, a hopping window can be used.

![](img/stragegy-1.png)

To decide what frame is a filler, we look at the proportion of its duration that is occupied by filler and if it's above an arbitrary threshold (I picked 80% to begin with), it will be labeled as such.

Window and hopping length can be adjusted after evaluation to find the optimal tradeoff between processing speed and performance.

## Features

The audio frames are transformed into [Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mel-frequency_cepstrum). It tells us what frequencies were most activated during the speech, creating a kind of compressed spectrogram. It represents the audio clip in a way that is similar to how we humans perceive sound, which makes MFCC a very popular feature in speech recognition systems.

![](img/mfcc.png)

## Labels

To choose an appropriate window and hop length for our data preprocessing, we have to consider the target distribution.

The filler sound length seems to follow a log-normal distribution. 

![](img/target_distribution.jpg)

Turns out in 95% of fillers last longer than 0.279 sec. A good fit for window length, therefore, would be anything below `sample_rate * 0.279`. Given that we down-sample the audio from 48k samples/sec to 8k, we get `2232` samples per window. We'll round that number to `2048`.

---

# Evaluation

To evaluate the models, I followed a few principles:
- Use different speakers in training & evaluation. This will ensure the model learns to detect filler sounds well for new speakers.
- Use the same threshold to decide what proportion of filler sound in a frame makes it labeled as `filler` (80%).   
- Use a suitable evaluation metric for imbalanced datasets. [Average precision (AP) score](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.average_precision_score.html) (area under the Precision-Recall Curve) seemed to be the best choice. It 1) is independent of the cutoff threshold and 2) focuses on the minority class and therefore is suitable for imbalanced datasets.

---

# Modeling

I tried out training two models: LightGBM & a multi-layer perceptron. Perceptron beats LightGBM after some fine-tuning.

```markdown
| Model                  | Avg. precision score | F1    |
|------------------------|----------------------|-------|
| LightGBM               | 0.103                | 0.114 |
| Multi-layer perceptron | 0.121                | 0.205 |
```

## LightGBM

Before jumping into deep learning, I trained a LightGBM model with reasonable default parameters to establish some baseline.  

```
| Avg. precision score | F1    |
|----------------------|-------|
| 0.103                | 0.114 |
```

![](img/results-lgbm.png)

## Multi-layer perceptron

Then I picked multi-layer perceptron as the first neural model to train. After hyperparameter tuning, the model beats the LightGBM on both F1 and AP scores.

```
| Avg. precision score | F1    |
|----------------------|-------|
| 0.121                | 0.205 |
```

![](img/results-mlp-fine-tuned.png)

## Further improvement ideas

1. **Tune training configuration:** Tweak other parameters in `constants.py` such as the window length & hop length of frames as well as labeling threshold.
2. **Treat input data as time series:** So far, each audio frame was treated as individual independent training example. However, it is hard to tell if a small piece of audio is a filler sound without context. Speech is actually a time series where order matters. I suspect that passing a sequence of audio frames instead of just one per training example would improve the results. RNN models such as LSTM can be used.
3. **Sushi method:** Pass raw data with no preprocessing to the neural network.

# Conclusion

Until now, using the model isn't practically useful. Multi-layer perceptron will cut a lot of good sound, whereas LightGBM will leave a lot of filler sounds untouched.

---
